# Language Intro

-   **Overview**

    -   Motoko is a new, modern, and type-safe programming language designed specifically for Internet Computer canister smart contracts (called Motoko actors).
    -   It is designed to support the unique features of the Internet Computer and provides a familiar yet robust programming environment.
    -   It can be compiled for other targets in the future.
    -   It aims to be approachable for programmers familiar with modern object-oriented and/or functional programming idioms.
    -   The Motoko compiler, documentation, and tooling are open source and released under the Apache 2.0 license.

-   **Asynchronous Messaging and Type Sound Execution**

    -   Motoko supports asynchronous message passing for distributed applications.
    -   Motoko Actors encapsulate their state and communicate with other actors through asynchronous messages, ensuring isolation and distribution.
    -   Motoko's type system ensures type safety and eliminates common programming pitfalls.
    -   It compiles to WebAssembly for execution on the Internet Computer.

-   **Each Canister Smart Contract as an Actor**

    -   Motoko provides an actor-based programming model for canister smart contracts.
    -   Motoko enables writing asynchronous code in a simpler, sequential style, avoiding the complexity of explicit asynchronous programming.
    -   Actors have isolated state and interact through asynchronous messaging.
    -   All communication between actors happens over the network using the Internet Computer's messaging protocol.

-   **Asynchronous Actors**

    -   Motoko allows asynchronous communication among components using actors.
    -   Actors can communicate concurrently, reducing latency.
    -   The programming abstractions in Motoko simplify the expression of interleaving behavior.

-   **Support for Asynchronous Behavior**

    -   Motoko supports asynchronous computing, where program and environment can progress independently.
    -   Programs can make requests without waiting for the environment, and vice versa.

-   **Syntactic Forms async and await**

    -   Motoko introduces async and await constructs for describing asynchronous dependencies.
    -   async introduces futures, representing promises of results delivered in the future.
    -   await synchronizes on a future and suspends computation until the future is completed.

-   **Types Are Static**

    -   Motoko supports variables carrying functions, objects, primitives, records, tuples, and variants.
    -   Motoko's type system ensures type safety, preventing runtime type errors.
    -   Types provide compiler-verified documentation in the program source code.
    -   It offers a modern type system with features like: - Sound structural types, generics, variant types, and statically checked pattern matching.

-   **Autogenerated Interface Description Language (IDL) files**

    -   Generated in a language neutral format called Candid
    -   Allow seamless interaction with canisters implemented in other programming languages that support Candid.

-   **Motoko leverages orthogonal persistence**

    -   Allows actor state and in-memory data structures to persist indefinitely without explicit storage operations.

-   **Upgrades in Motoko are supported**

    -   Certain variables can be declared as stable to retain their values across canister upgrades.

-   Motoko provides developer productivity features like subtyping, arbitrary precision arithmetic, and garbage collection.
-   While Motoko is the primary language for canister smart contracts, a Canister Development Kit (CDK) for other languages (like Rust) are available to produce canister smart contracts that interoperate with Motoko through Candid interfaces.
